ITIVUTTAKA 1

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Abandon one quality, monks, and I guarantee you non-return. Which one quality? Abandon greed as the one quality, and I guarantee you non-return.' This is the meaning of what the Blessed One said. So with regard to this it was said:

The greed with which

beings go to a bad destination,

coveting:

from rightly knowing that greed,

those who see clearly

let go.

Letting go,

they never come to this world

again.

This, too, was the meaning of what was said by the Blessed One, so I have heard.



ITIVUTTAKA 2

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Abandon one quality, monks, and I guarantee you non-return. Which one quality? Abandon aversion as the one quality, and I guarantee you non-return.'

The aversion with which

beings go to a bad destination,

upset:

from rightly knowing that aversion,

those who see clearly

let go.

Letting go,

they never come to this world

again.



ITIVUTTAKA 3

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Abandon one quality, monks, and I guarantee you non-return. Which one quality? Abandon delusion as the one quality, and I guarantee you non-return.'

The delusion with which

beings go to a bad destination,

confused:

from rightly knowing that delusion,

those who see clearly

let go.

Letting go,

they never come to this world

again.



ITIVUTTAKA 4

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Abandon one quality, monks, and I guarantee you non-return. Which one quality? Abandon anger as the one quality, and I guarantee you non-return.'

The anger with which

beings go to a bad destination,

enraged:

from rightly knowing that anger,

those who see clearly

let go.

Letting go,

they never come to this world

again.



ITIVUTTAKA 5

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Abandon one quality, monks, and I guarantee you non-return. Which one quality? Abandon contempt as the one quality, and I guarantee you non-return.'

The contempt with which

beings go to a bad destination,

disdainful:

from rightly knowing that contempt,

those who see clearly

let go.

Letting go,

they never come to this world

again.



ITIVUTTAKA 6

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Abandon one quality, monks, and I guarantee you non-return. Which one quality? Abandon conceit as the one quality, and I guarantee you non-return.'

The conceit with which

beings go to a bad destination,

proud:

from rightly knowing that conceit,

those who see clearly

let go.

Letting go,

they never come to this world

again.



ITIVUTTAKA 7

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, one who has not fully known & fully understood the All, whose mind has not been cleansed of passion for it, has not abandoned it, is incapable of putting an end to stress. But one who has fully known & fully understood the All, whose mind has been cleansed of passion for it and has abandoned it, is capable of putting an end to stress.'

Knowing the All

from all around,

not stirred by passion

in all places:

he, having comprehended

the All,

has gone beyond

all stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 8

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, one who has not fully known & fully understood conceit, whose mind has not been cleansed of passion for it, has not abandoned it, is incapable of putting an end to stress. But one who has fully known & fully understood conceit, whose mind has been cleansed of passion for it, has abandoned it, is capable of putting an end to stress.'

People are

possessed by conceit

bound with conceit

delighted with becoming.

Not comprehending conceit,

they come to further becoming.

But those who, letting go of conceit,

are, in its destruction, released,

conquering the bond of conceit,

go beyond

all bonds.



ITIVUTTAKA 9

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, one who has not fully known & fully understood greed, whose mind has not been cleansed of passion for it, has not abandoned it, is incapable of putting an end to stress. But one who has fully known & fully understood greed, who has detached his mind from it and let go of it, is capable of putting an end to stress.'

The greed with which

beings go to a bad destination,

coveting:

from rightly knowing that greed,

those who see clearly

let go.

Letting go,

they never come to this world

again.



ITIVUTTAKA 10—13

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, one who has not fully known & fully understood aversion… delusion… anger… contempt, whose mind has not been cleansed of passion for it, has not abandoned it, is incapable of putting an end to stress. But one who has fully known & fully understood aversion… delusion… anger… contempt, whose mind has been cleansed of passion for it and has abandoned it, is capable of putting an end to stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 14

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, I don't envision even one other hindrance–hindered by which people go wandering & transmigrating on for a long, long time–like the hindrance of ignorance. Hindered by the hindrance of ignorance, people go wandering & transmigrating on for a long, long time.'

No one other thing

so hinders people

that they wander on, day & night,

as when they're obstructed

by delusion.

But those who, letting go of delusion,

shatter the mass of darkness,

wander               no further.

Their cause isn't found.



ITIVUTTAKA 15

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, I don't envision even one other fetter–fettered by which beings conjoined go wandering & transmigrating on for a long, long time–like the fetter of craving. Fettered with the fetter of craving, beings conjoined go wandering & transmigrating on for a long, long time.'

With craving his companion, a man

wanders on a long, long time.

Neither in this state here

nor anywhere else

does he go beyond

the wandering-on.

Knowing this drawback–

that craving brings stress into play–

free               from craving,

devoid of clinging,

mindful,               the monk

lives the mendicant life.



ITIVUTTAKA 16

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, with regard to internal factors, I don't envision any other single factor like appropriate attention as doing so much for a monk in training, who has not attained the heart's aspiration but remains intent on the unsurpassed safety from bondage. A monk who attends appropriately abandons what is unskillful and develops what is skillful.

Appropriate attention

as a quality

of a monk in training:

nothing else

does so much

for attaining the superlative goal.

A monk, striving appropriately,

attains the ending of stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 17

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, with regard to external factors, I don't envision any other single factor like friendship with admirable people as doing so much for a monk in training, who has not attained the heart's aspiration but remains intent on the unsurpassed safety from bondage. A monk who is a friend with admirable people abandons what is unskillful and develops what is skillful.'

A monk who's a friend

to admirable people

–who's reverential, respectful,

doing what his friends advise–

mindful, alert,

attains step by step

the ending of all fetters.



ITIVUTTAKA 18

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'One thing, monks, when arising in the world, arises for the detriment of many, for the unhappiness of many, for the detriment & unhappiness of many beings, both human & divine. Which one thing? Schism in the Saṅgha. When the Saṅgha is split, there are arguments with one another, there is abuse of one another, ganging up on one another, abandoning of one another. There those with little confidence [in the teaching] lose all confidence, while some of those who are confident become otherwise.'

Doomed for an eon

to deprivation,

to hell:

one who has split the Saṅgha.

Delighting in factions,

unjudicious–

he's barred

from safety from bondage.

Having split a Saṅgha in concord,

he cooks for an eon

in hell.



ITIVUTTAKA 19

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'One thing, monks, when arising in the world, arises for the welfare of many, for the happiness of many, for the welfare & happiness of many beings, both human & divine. Which one thing? Concord in the Saṅgha. When the Saṅgha is in concord, there are no arguments with one another, no abuse of one another, no ganging up on one another, no abandoning of one another. There those with little confidence [in the teaching] become confident, while those already confident become even more so.'

Blissful is concord in the Saṅgha.

One who assists in concord–

delighting in concord,

judicious–

isn't barred from safety from bondage.

Having brought concord to the Saṅgha,

he rejoices for an eon

in heaven.



ITIVUTTAKA 20

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there is the case where a certain person is corrupt-minded. Having encompassed that mind with [my] awareness, I discern, 'If this person were to die at this instant, then as if he were to be carried off, he would thus be placed in hell.' Why is that? Because his mind is corrupt. It's because of corrupt-mindedness that there are cases where beings–at the break-up of the body, after death–reappear in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.'

Knowing the case

of a corrupt-minded person,

the One Awakened explained its meaning

in the presence of the monks.

If that person

were to die at this instant,

he'd reappear in hell

because his mind is corrupt–

as if he were carried off

and placed there.

It's because of corrupt-mindedness

that beings go

to a bad destination.



ITIVUTTAKA 21

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there is the case where a certain person is clear-minded. Having encompassed that mind with [my] awareness, I discern, 'If this person were to die at this instant, then as if he were to be carried off, he would thus be placed in heaven.' Why is that? Because his mind is clear. It's because of clear-mindedness that there are cases where some beings–at the break-up of the body, after death–reappear in a heavenly world.'

Knowing the case

of a clear-minded person,

the One Awakened explained its meaning

in the presence of the monks.

If that person

were to die at this instant,

he'd reappear in heaven

because his mind is clear–

as if he were carried off

and placed there.

It's because of clear-mindedness

that beings go

to a good destination.



ITIVUTTAKA 22

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, don't be afraid of acts of merit. This is a synonym for what is blissful, desirable, pleasing, endearing, charming–i e, acts of merit. I directly know that, having long performed meritorious deeds, I long experienced desirable, pleasing, endearing, charming results. Having developed a mind of good will for seven years, then for seven eons of contraction & expansion I didn't return to this world. Whenever the eon was contracting, I entered the [realm of] Radiance. Whenever the eon was expanding, I reappeared in an empty Brahma-abode. There I was Brahma, the Great Brahma, the Unconquered Conqueror, Total Seer, Wielder of Power. Then for thirty-six times I was Sakka, ruler of the gods. For many hundreds of times I was a king, a wheel-turning emperor, a righteous king of Dhamma, conqueror of the four corners of the earth, maintaining stable control over the countryside, endowed with the seven treasures –to say nothing of the times I was a local king. The thought occurred to me, 'Of what action of mine is this the fruit, of what action the result, that I now have such great power & might?' Then the thought occurred to me, 'This is the fruit of my three [types of] action, the result of three types of action, that I now have such great power & might: i e, generosity, self-control, & restraint.'

Train in acts of merit

that yield the foremost profit of bliss–

develop generosity,

a life in tune,

a mind of good will.

Developing these

three things

that bring about bliss,

the wise reappear

in a world of bliss

unalloyed.



ITIVUTTAKA 23

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'This one quality, monks, when developed & pursued, keeps both kinds of benefit secure: benefit in this life & in lives to come. Which one quality? Heedfulness with regard to skillful qualities. This is the one quality that, when developed & pursued, keeps both kinds of benefit secure: benefit in this life & in lives to come.'

They praise heedfulness, the wise,

in doing acts of merit.

When heedful, wise,

you achieve both kinds of benefit:

benefits            in this life,

& benefits            in lives to come.

By breaking through to your benefit,

you're called enlightened,

wise.



ITIVUTTAKA 24

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, if a single person were to wander & transmigrate on for an eon, he or she would leave behind a chain of bones, a pile of bones, a heap of bones, as large as this Mount Vepulla, if there were someone to collect them and the collection were not destroyed.'

The accumulation

of a single person's

bones for an eon

would be a heap

on a par with the mountain,

so said the Great Seer.

(He declared this to be

the great Mount Vepulla

to the north of Vulture Peak

in the mountain-ring

of the Magadhans.)

But when that person sees

with right discernment

the four Noble Truths–

stress,

the cause of stress,

the transcending of stress,

& the noble eightfold path,

the way to the stilling of stress–

having wandered on

seven times at most, then,

with the ending of all fetters,

he makes an end

of stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 25

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, for the person who transgresses in one thing, I tell you, there is no evil deed that is not to be done. Which one thing? This: telling a deliberate lie.'

For the person who lies,

who transgresses in this one thing,

transcending concern for the world beyond:

there's no evil

not to be done.



ITIVUTTAKA 26

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, if beings knew, as I know, the results of giving & sharing, they would not eat without having given, nor would the stain of selfishness overcome their minds. Even if it were their last bite, their last mouthful, they would not eat without having shared, if there were someone to receive their gift. But because beings do not know, as I know, the results of giving & sharing, they eat without having given. The stain of selfishness overcomes their minds.'

If beings knew

what the Great Seer said,

how the result of sharing

has such great fruit,

then, subduing the stain of selfishness

with brightened awareness,

they'd give in season

to the noble ones,

where a gift bears great fruit.

Having given food

as an offering

to those worthy of offerings,

many donors,

when they pass away from here,

the human state,

go

to heaven.

They, having gone there

to heaven,

rejoice,

enjoying sensual pleasures.

Unselfish, they

partake of the result

of sharing.



ITIVUTTAKA 27

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, all the grounds for making merit leading to spontaneously arising [in heaven] do not equal one-sixteenth of the awareness-release through good will. Good will–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles.

'Just as the radiance of all the stars does not equal one-sixteenth of the radiance of the moon, as the moon–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles, even so, all the grounds for making merit leading to spontaneously arising [in heaven] do not equal one-sixteenth of the awareness-release through good will. Good will–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles.

'Just as in the last month of the rains, in autumn, when the sky is clear & cloudless, the sun, on ascending the sky, overpowers the space immersed in darkness, shines, blazes, & dazzles, even so, all the grounds for making merit leading to spontaneously arising [in heaven] do not equal one-sixteenth of the awareness-release through good will. Good will–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles.

'Just as in the last stage of the night the morning star shines, blazes, & dazzles, even so, all the grounds for making merit leading to spontaneously arising [in heaven] do not equal one-sixteenth of the awareness-release through good will. Good will–surpassing them–shines, blazes, & dazzles.'

When one develops–mindful–

good will without limit,

fetters are worn through,

on seeing the ending

of acquisitions.

If with uncorrupted mind

you feel good will

for even            one being,

you become skilled from that.

But a noble one produces

a mind of sympathy

for                     all beings,

an abundance of merit.

Kingly seers, who conquered the earth

swarming with beings,

went about making sacrifices:

the horse sacrifice, human sacrifice,

water rites, soma rites,

& the 'Unobstructed,'

but these don't equal

one sixteenth

of a well-developed mind of good will–

as all the constellations don't,

one sixteenth

of the radiance of the moon.

One who

neither kills

nor gets others to kill,

neither conquers,

nor gets others to conquer,

with good will for all beings,

has no hostility with anyone

at all.



ITIVUTTAKA 28

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Endowed with two things, monks, a monk lives in stress in the present life–troubled, distressed, & feverish–and at the break-up of the body, after death, a bad destination can be expected. Which two? A lack of guarding of the doors of the sense faculties, and knowing no moderation in food. Endowed with these two things, a monk lives in stress in the present life–troubled, distressed, & feverish–and at the break-up of the body, after death, a bad destination can be expected.'

Eye & ear & nose,

tongue, body & mind:

when a monk leaves these doors unguarded

–knowing no moderation in food,

not restraining his senses–

he experiences stress:

stress in body, stress

in mind.

Burning in body,

burning in mind,

whether by day or by night,

one like this

lives in suffering & stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 29

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Endowed with two things, monks, a monk lives in ease in the present life–untroubled, undistressed, & unfeverish–and at the break-up of the body, after death, a good destination can be expected. Which two? A guarding of the doors of the sense faculties, and knowing moderation in food. Endowed with these two things, a monk lives in ease in the present life–untroubled, undistressed, & unfeverish–and at the break-up of the body, after death, a good destination can be expected.'

Eye & ear & nose,

tongue, body, & mind:

when a monk has these doors well guarded

–knowing moderation in food,

restraining his senses–

he experiences ease:

ease in body, ease

in mind.

Not burning in body,

not burning in mind,

whether by day or by night,

one like this

lives in ease.



ITIVUTTAKA 30

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these two things that cause remorse. Which two? There is the case of the person who has not done what is admirable, has not done what is skillful, has not given protection to those in fear, and instead has done what is evil, savage, & cruel. Thinking, 'I have not done what is admirable,' he feels remorse. Thinking, 'I have done what is evil,' he feels remorse. These are the two things that cause remorse.'

Having engaged

in bodily misconduct,

verbal misconduct,

misconduct of mind,

or whatever else is flawed,

not having done what is skillful,

having done much that is not,

at the break-up of the body,

the undiscerning one reappears in

hell.



ITIVUTTAKA 31

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these two things that cause no remorse. Which two? There is the case of the person who has done what is admirable, has done what is skillful, has given protection to those in fear, and has done nothing that is evil, savage, or cruel. Thinking, 'I have done what is admirable,' he feels no remorse. Thinking, 'I have not done what is evil,' he feels no remorse. These are the two things that cause no remorse.'

Having abandoned

bodily misconduct,

verbal misconduct,

misconduct of mind,

& whatever else is flawed,

not having done what's not skillful,

having done much that is,

at the break-up of the body,

the discerning one reappears

in heaven.



ITIVUTTAKA 32

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Endowed with two things, monks, a person–as if carried off–is thus placed in hell. Which two? Evil habits & evil views. Endowed with these two things, a person–as if carried off–is thus placed in hell.'

Evil habits &

evil views:

a person, undiscerning,

endowed with these two things,

at the break-up of the body

reappears in hell.



ITIVUTTAKA 33

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Endowed with two things, monks, a person–as if carried off–is thus placed in heaven. Which two? Auspicious habits & auspicious views. Endowed with these two things, a person–as if carried off–is thus placed in heaven.'

Auspicious habits &

auspicious views:

a person, discerning,

endowed with these two things,

at the break-up of the body

reappears in heaven.



ITIVUTTAKA 34

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, a person without ardency, without compunction, is incapable of self-awakening, incapable of Unbinding, incapable of attaining the unsurpassed safety from bondage. A person ardent & compunctious is capable of self-awakening, capable of Unbinding, capable of attaining the unsurpassed safety from bondage.'

With no ardency, no

compunction,

lazy, with low persistence,

full of sloth & drowsiness,

shameless, without respect:

he's incapable,

a monk like this,

of touching superlative

self-awakening.

But whoever is mindful, masterful,

absorbed in jhāna,

ardent, concerned, & heedful,

cutting the fetter of birth & aging,

touches right here

a self-awakening un-

surpassed.



ITIVUTTAKA 35

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, this holy life is lived, not for the sake of deceiving people, not for the sake of inveigling people, not for the sake of the rewards of gain, offerings, & tribute, nor with the thought, 'Thus may people know me.' This holy life is lived for the sake of restraint & abandoning.'

For the sake of restraint,

for the sake of abandoning,

he, the Blessed One, taught

a holy life not handed down,

coming ashore

in Unbinding.

This path is pursued

by those great in purpose,

great seers.

Those who follow it,

as taught by the One Awakened,

heeding the Teacher's message,

will put an end

to suffering & stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 36

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, this holy life is lived, not for the sake of deceiving people, not for the sake of inveigling people, not for the sake of the rewards of gain, offerings, & tribute, nor with the thought, 'Thus may people know me.' This holy life is lived for the sake of direct knowledge & full comprehension.'

For the sake of direct knowledge & full

comprehension,

he, the Blessed One, taught

a holy life not handed down,

coming ashore

in Unbinding.

This path is pursued

by those great in purpose,

great seers.

Those who follow it,

as taught by the One Awakened,

heeding the Teacher's message,

will put an end

to suffering & stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 37

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Endowed with two things, monks, a monk lives full of ease in the here-&-now and is appropriately aroused for the ending of the effluents. Which two? A sense of urgency toward things that should inspire urgency and, feeling urgency, appropriate exertion. Endowed with these two things, a monk lives full of ease in the here-&-now and is appropriately aroused for the ending of the effluents.'

Feeling urgency right here

toward what should inspire urgency,

the wise,

masterful,

ardent monk

should investigate

with discernment.

One who lives thus ardently,

not restlessly, at peace,

committed to awareness-tranquility,

would attain the ending

of suffering & stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 38

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, two trains of thought often occur to the Tathāgata, worthy & rightly self-awakened: the thought of safety & that of seclusion.

'The Tathāgata enjoys non-ill will, delights in non-ill will. To him–enjoying non-ill will, delighting in non-ill will–this thought often occurs: 'By this activity I harm no one at all, whether weak or firm.'

'The Tathāgata enjoys seclusion, delights in seclusion. To him–enjoying seclusion, delighting in seclusion–this thought often occurs: 'Whatever is unskillful is abandoned.'

'Thus, monks, you too should live enjoying non-ill will, delighting in non-ill will. To you–enjoying non-ill will, delighting in non-ill will–this thought will often occur: 'By this activity we harm no one at all, whether weak or firm.'

'You too should live enjoying seclusion, delighting in seclusion. To you–enjoying seclusion, delighting in seclusion–this thought will often occur: 'What is unskillful? What is not yet abandoned? What are we abandoning?'

To the Tathāgata,

awakened,

who endured what is hard to endure,

two thoughts occur:

safety

the first thought mentioned;

seclusion

the second declared.

The dispeller of darkness, free

of effluent,

the great seer

who has

gone beyond,

reached attainment,

gained mastery,

crossed over the poisons;

who's released in the ending of craving:

that sage

bears his last body,

has shaken off Māra, I tell you,

has gone      beyond aging.

As one standing on a rocky crag

would see the people all around below,

so the wise one,

with the all-around eye,

having scaled the tower

made of Dhamma,

having crossed over sorrow,

gazes on those overwhelmed with sorrow,

conquered by aging & death.



ITIVUTTAKA 39

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, the Tathāgata–worthy & rightly self-awakened–has two Dhamma discourses given in sequence. Which two? 'See evil as evil.' This is the first Dhamma discourse. 'Having seen evil as evil, become disenchanted there, dispassionate there, released.' This is the second Dhamma discourse. These are the two Dhamma discourses that the Tathāgata–worthy & rightly self-awakened–has given in sequence.'

See the two statements,

declared in sequence,

by the Tathāgata,

awakened, sympathetic

to all beings.

The first: see evil.

Be dispassionate there

toward evil.

Then, with a mind dispassionate,

you will make an end

of suffering & stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 40

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, ignorance precedes the arrival of unskillful qualities; lack of shame & lack of compunction follow after. Clear knowing precedes the arrival of skillful qualities; shame & compunction follow after.'

Any bad destinations

in this world, in the next,

are rooted in ignorance–all–

accumulations

of desire & greed.

And when a person of evil desires

lacks shame & respect,

evil comes from that,

and by that he goes

to deprivation.

So cleansing away

ignorance, desire, & greed,

a monk giving rise to clear knowing

would abandon all bad destinations.



ITIVUTTAKA 41

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, those beings are truly deprived who are deprived of noble discernment. They live in stress in the present life–troubled, distressed, & feverish–and at the break-up of the body, after death, a bad destination can be expected.

'Those beings are not deprived who are not deprived of noble discernment. They live in ease in the present life–untroubled, undistressed, & not feverish–and at the break-up of the body, after death, a good destination can be expected.

Look at the world

–including its heavenly beings:

deprived of discernment,

making an abode in name-&-form,

it conceives that 'This is the truth.'

The best discernment in the world

is what leads

to penetration,

for it rightly discerns

the total ending of birth & becoming.

Human & heavenly beings

hold them dear:

those who are

self-awakened,

mindful,

bearing their last bodies

with joyful discernment.



ITIVUTTAKA 42

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, these two bright qualities safeguard the world. Which two? Shame & compunction. If these two bright qualities did not safeguard the world, there would be no discerning of 'mother,' 'aunt,' 'uncle's wife,' 'teacher's wife,' or 'wife of those deserving respect.' The world would fall into promiscuity, like rams with goats, roosters with pigs, or dogs with jackals. But because these two bright qualities do safeguard the world, there is the discerning of 'mother,' 'aunt,' 'uncle's wife,' 'teacher's wife,' & 'wife of those deserving respect.'

Those in whom

shame & compunction

are not always found

have strayed

from the bright root,

are headed

to birth & death.

But those in whom

shame & compunction

always are rightly established,

who are mature in the holy life:

they are calm,

their further becoming

ended.



ITIVUTTAKA 43

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'There is, monks, an unborn–unbecome–unmade–unfabricated. If there were not that unborn–unbecome–unmade–unfabricated, there would not be the case that escape from the born–become–made–fabricated would be discerned. But precisely because there is an unborn–unbecome–unmade–unfabricated, escape from the born–become–made–fabricated is thus discerned.'

The born, become, produced,

made, fabricated, impermanent,

fabricated of aging & death,

a nest of illnesses, perishing,

come-into-being through nourishment

and the guide [that is craving]–

is unfit for delight.

The escape from that

is

peaceful, permanent,

a sphere beyond conjecture,

unborn, unproduced,

the sorrowless, stainless state,

the cessation of stressful qualities,

stilling-of-fabrications bliss.



ITIVUTTAKA 44

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these two forms of the Unbinding property. Which two? The Unbinding property with fuel remaining, & the Unbinding property with no fuel remaining.

'And what is the Unbinding property with fuel remaining? There is the case where a monk is an Arahant whose effluents have ended, who has reached fulfillment, finished the task, laid down the burden, attained the true goal, destroyed the fetter of becoming, and is released through right gnosis. His five sense faculties still remain and, owing to their being intact, he experiences the pleasing & the displeasing, and is sensitive to pleasure & pain. His ending of passion, aversion, & delusion is termed the Unbinding property with fuel remaining.

'And what is the Unbinding property with no fuel remaining? There is the case where a monk is an Arahant whose effluents have ended, who has reached fulfillment, finished the task, laid down the burden, attained the true goal, destroyed the fetter of becoming, and is released through right gnosis. For him, all that is sensed, being unrelished, will grow cold right here. This is termed the Unbinding property with no fuel remaining.'

These two

proclaimed

by the one with vision,

Unbinding properties

the one independent,

the one who is Such:

one property, here in this life,

with fuel remaining

from the destruction of [craving],

the guide to becoming,

and that with no fuel remaining,

after this life,

in which all becoming

totally ceases.

Those who know

this unfabricated state,

their minds released

through the destruction of [craving],

the guide to becoming,

they, attaining the Dhamma's heartwood,

delighting in ending,

have abandoned all becoming:

they, the Such.



ITIVUTTAKA 45

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, live enjoying aloofness, delighting in aloofness, inwardly committed to awareness-tranquility, not neglecting jhāna, endowed with clear-seeing insight, and frequenting empty buildings. As you live enjoying aloofness, delighting in aloofness, inwardly committed to awareness-tranquility, not neglecting jhāna, endowed with clear-seeing insight, and frequenting empty buildings, then one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right in the here-&-now, or–if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance–non-return.'

Those with calm minds–

masterful,

mindful,

absorbed in jhāna–

clearly see Dhamma rightly,

not intent on sensual pleasures.

Delighting in heedfulness,

calm,

seeing danger in heedlessness, they

–incapable of falling away–

are right in the presence of Unbinding.



ITIVUTTAKA 46

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, live with the trainings [in heightened virtue, heightened mind, & heightened discernment] as your reward, with discernment uppermost, release the essence, & mindfulness the governing principle. As you live with the trainings as your reward, with discernment uppermost, release the essence, & mindfulness the governing principle, then one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right in the here-&-now, or–if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance–non-return.'

Complete in the training,

not subject to falling away,

one with discernment

uppermost,

seeing the stopping, the ending of birth:

that sage

bears his last body,

has shaken off Māra, I tell you,

has gone beyond aging.

So, always

delighting in jhāna,

centered,

ardent,

seeing the stopping, the ending of birth,

conquering Māra, along with his armies,

monks,

be gone-beyond aging & death.



ITIVUTTAKA 47

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, a monk should be wakeful: mindful, alert, centered, sensitive, clear, & calm. And there he should, at the appropriate times, see clearly into skillful mental qualities. For a monk who is wakeful–mindful, alert, centered, sensitive, clear, & calm, seeing clearly, at the appropriate times, into skillful mental qualities–one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right in the here-&-now, or–if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance–non-return.'

Those who are wakeful, listen to this!

Those who are sleeping, wake up!

Wakefulness is better than sleep.

For those who are wakeful,

there's no danger, no fear.

Whoever is wakeful,

mindful, alert,

centered, sensitive,

calm, & clear,

rightly exploring the Dhamma

at appropriate times,

he–on becoming unified–

could shatter the darkness.

So be devoted to wakefulness.

The ardent monk

–masterful, acquiring jhāna,

cutting the fetter of birth & aging–

touches right here

a self-awakening un-

surpassed.



ITIVUTTAKA 48

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, these two are doomed to deprivation, to hell, for not abandoning their conduct. Which two? One who, not living the celibate life, pretends to be one who lives the celibate life; and one who groundlessly accuses one who lives the celibate life perfectly & purely of uncelibate behavior. These are the two who are doomed to deprivation, to hell, for not abandoning their conduct.'

He goes to hell,

the one who asserts

what didn't take place,

as does the one

who, having done,

says, 'I didn't.'

Both–low-acting people–

there become equal:

after death, in the world beyond.

An ochre robe tied 'round their necks,

many with evil qualities

–unrestrained, evil–

rearise, because of their evil acts,

in hell.

Better to eat an iron ball

–glowing, aflame–

than that, unprincipled &

unrestrained,

you should eat the alms of the country.



ITIVUTTAKA 49

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Overcome by two viewpoints, monks, some human & divine beings adhere, other human & divine beings slip right past, while those with vision see.

'And how do some adhere? Human & divine beings enjoy becoming, delight in becoming, are satisfied with becoming. When the Dhamma is being taught for the sake of the cessation of becoming, their minds do not take to it, are not calmed by it, do not settle on it or become resolved on it. This is how some adhere.

'And how do some slip right past? Some, feeling horrified, humiliated, & disgusted with that very becoming, relish non-becoming: 'When this self, at the break-up of the body, after death, perishes & is destroyed, and does not exist after death, that is peaceful, that is exquisite, that is sufficiency!' This is how some slip right past.

'And how do those with vision see? There is the case where a monk sees what's come to be as what's come to be. Seeing what's come to be as what's come to be, he practices for disenchantment with what's come to be, dispassion toward what's come to be, cessation of what's come to be. This is how those with vision see.'

Those, having seen

what's come to be

as what's come to be,

and what's gone beyond

what's come to be,

are released in line

with what's come to be,

through the exhaustion of craving

for becoming.

If they've comprehended

what's come to be,

and are free from the craving

for becoming & non-,

with the non-becoming

of what's come to be,

monks come

to no further becoming.



ITIVUTTAKA 50

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three roots of what is unskillful. Which three? Greed as a root of what is unskillful, aversion as a root of what is unskillful, delusion as a root of what is unskillful. These are the three roots of what is unskillful.'

Greed, aversion, delusion destroy

the self-same person of evil mind

from whom they are born,

like the fruiting

of the bamboo.



ITIVUTTAKA 51

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three properties. Which three? The property of form, the property of formlessness, the property of cessation. These are the three properties.'

Comprehending the property of form,

not taking a stance in the formless,

those released in cessation

are people who've left death      behind.

Having touched with his body

the deathless

property                  free

from acquisitions,

having realized the relinquishing

of acquisitions,

effluent-free,

the Rightly

Self-awakened One

teaches the state

with

no sorrow,

no dust.



ITIVUTTAKA 52

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three feelings. Which three? A feeling of pleasure, a feeling of pain, a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain. These are the three feelings.'

Centered,

alert,

mindful,

the Awakened One's

disciple

discerns feelings,

how feelings come into play,

where they cease,

& the path to their ending.

With the ending of feelings, a monk

free from hunger

is totally unbound.



ITIVUTTAKA 53

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three feelings. Which three? A feeling of pleasure, a feeling of pain, a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain. A feeling of pleasure should be seen as stressful. A feeling of pain should be seen as an arrow. A feeling of neither pleasure nor pain should be seen as inconstant. When a monk has seen a feeling of pleasure as stressful, a feeling of pain as an arrow, and a feeling of neither pleasure nor pain as inconstant, then he is called a monk who is noble, who has seen rightly, who has cut off craving, destroyed the fetters, and who–from the right breaking-through of conceit–has put an end to suffering & stress.'

Whoever sees

pleasure as stress,

sees pain as an arrow,

sees peaceful neither pleasure nor pain

as inconstant:

he is a monk

who's seen rightly.

From that he is there released.

A master of direct knowing,

at peace,

he is a sage

gone beyond bonds.



ITIVUTTAKA 54

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three searches. Which three? The search for sensuality, the search for becoming, the search for a holy life. These are the three searches.'

Centered,

alert,

mindful,

the Awakened One's

disciple

discerns searches,

how searches come into play,

where they cease,

& the path to their ending.

With the ending of searches, a monk

free from hunger

is totally unbound.



ITIVUTTAKA 55

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three searches. Which three? The search for sensuality, the search for becoming, the search for a holy life. These are the three searches.'

Sensuality-search, becoming-search,

together with the holy-life search–

i e, grasping at 'such is the truth'

based on an accumulation

of viewpoints:

through the relinquishing of searches

& the abolishing of viewpoints

of one dispassionate to

all passion,

and released in the ending

of craving,

through the ending of searches, the monk

is without perplexity, free

of longing.



ITIVUTTAKA 56

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three effluents. Which three? The effluent of sensuality, the effluent of becoming, the effluent of ignorance. These are the three effluents.'

Centered,

alert,

mindful,

the Awakened One's

disciple

discerns effluents,

how effluents come into play,

where they cease,

& the path to their ending.

With the ending of effluents, a monk

free from hunger

is totally unbound.



ITIVUTTAKA 57

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three effluents. Which three? The effluent of sensuality, the effluent of becoming, the effluent of ignorance. These are the three effluents.'

His effluent of sensuality

ended,

his ignorance

faded away,

his effluent of becoming

exhausted:

one totally released, acquisition-free,

bears his last body,

having conquered Māra

along with his mount.



ITIVUTTAKA 58

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three cravings. Which three? Craving for sensuality, craving for becoming, craving for non-becoming. These are the three cravings.'

Bound with the bondage of craving,

their minds smitten

with becoming & non-,

they are bound               with the bondage of Māra–

people                  with no safety from bondage,

beings                  going through the wandering-on,

headed for birth & death.

While those who've abandoned craving,

free from the craving for becoming & non-,

reaching the ending of effluents,

though in the world,

have gone            beyond.



ITIVUTTAKA 59

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Endowed with three qualities, monks, a monk has passed beyond Māra's domain and shines like the sun. Which three? There is the case where a monk is endowed with the aggregate of virtue of one beyond training [i e, an Arahant], the aggregate of concentration of one beyond training, the aggregate of discernment of one beyond training. Endowed with these three qualities a monk has passed beyond Māra's domain and shines like the sun.'

Virtue, concentration, discernment:

one in whom these are well-developed,

passing beyond Māra's domain,

shines

like the sun.



ITIVUTTAKA 60

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three grounds for meritorious activity. Which three? The ground for meritorious activity made of generosity, the ground for meritorious activity made of virtue, and the ground for meritorious activity made of development [meditation]. These are the three grounds for meritorious activity.'

Train in acts of merit

that yield the foremost profit of bliss–

develop generosity,

a life in tune,

a mind of good will.

Developing these

three things

that bring about bliss,

the wise reappear

in a world of bliss

unalloyed.



ITIVUTTAKA 61

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three eyes. Which three? The eye of flesh, the divine eye, & the eye of discernment. These are the three eyes.'

The eye of flesh,

the eye divine,

the eye of discernment

unsurpassed:

these three eyes were taught

by the Superlative Person.

The arising of the eye of flesh

is the path to the eye divine.

When knowledge arises,

the eye of discernment unsurpassed:

whoever gains this eye

is–from all suffering & stress–

released.



ITIVUTTAKA 62

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three faculties. Which three? The faculty of 'I am about to know what is not yet finally known,' the faculty of final knowledge, the faculty of one who has finally known. These are the three faculties.'

For a learner in training

along the straight path:

first, the knowledge of ending;

then, immediately,

gnosis;

then, from the ending

of the fetter–becoming–

there's the knowledge,

the gnosis of         one released

who is Such:

'My release is unprovoked.'

One consummate in these faculties,

peaceful,

delighting in the peaceful state,

bears his last body,

having conquered Māra

along with his mount.



ITIVUTTAKA 63

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three times. Which three? Past time, future time, present time. These are the three times.'

Perceiving in terms of signs, beings

take a stand on signs.

Not fully comprehending signs, they

come into the bonds

of death.

But fully comprehending signs, one

doesn't construe a signifier.

Touching liberation with the heart,

the state of peace unsurpassed,

consummate in terms of signs,

peaceful,

delighting in the peaceful state,

judicious,

an attainer-of-wisdom

makes use of classifications

but can't be classified.



ITIVUTTAKA 64

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three kinds of misconduct. Which three? Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct. These are the three kinds of misconduct.'

Having engaged

in bodily misconduct,

acts of verbal misconduct,

misconduct of mind,

or whatever else is flawed,

not having done what is skillful,

having done much that is not,

at the break-up of the body,

the undiscerning one reappears in

hell.



ITIVUTTAKA 65

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three kinds of good conduct. Which three? Bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, mental good conduct. These are the three kinds of good conduct.'

Having abandoned

bodily misconduct,

acts of verbal misconduct,

misconduct of mind,

& whatever else is flawed,

not having done what's not skillful,

having done much that is,

at the break-up of the body,

the discerning one reappears

in heaven.



ITIVUTTAKA 66

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three kinds of cleanliness. Which three? Bodily cleanliness, verbal cleanliness, mental cleanliness. These are the three kinds of cleanliness.'

Clean in body,

clean in speech,

clean in awareness

–effluent-free–

one who is clean,

consummate in cleanliness,

is said to have abandoned

the All.



ITIVUTTAKA 67

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three forms of sagacity. Which three? Bodily sagacity, verbal sagacity, mental sagacity. These are the three forms of sagacity.'

A sage in body, a sage in speech,

a sage in mind, effluent-free:

a sage consummate         in sagacity

is said to be bathed                     of evil.



ITIVUTTAKA 68

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, anyone whose passion is unabandoned, whose aversion is unabandoned, whose delusion is unabandoned is said to have gone over to Māra's camp, has come under Māra's power. The Evil One can do with that person as he likes. But anyone whose passion is abandoned, whose aversion is abandoned, whose delusion is abandoned is said not to have gone over to Māra's camp, has thrown off Māra's power. With that person, the Evil One cannot do as he likes.'

Anyone

whose passion, aversion, & ignorance

have faded away,

is said to be

composed in mind,

Brahma-become,

awakened, Tathāgata,

one for whom fear & hostility

are past,

one who's abandoned

the All.



ITIVUTTAKA 69

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, anyone–monk or nun–in whom passion is unabandoned, aversion is unabandoned, & delusion is unabandoned, is said not to have crossed the ocean with its waves, breakers, & whirlpools, its seizers & demons. Anyone–monk or nun–in whom passion is abandoned, aversion is abandoned, & delusion is abandoned, is said to have crossed the ocean with its waves, breakers, & whirlpools, its seizers & demons. Having crossed over, having reached the far shore, he or she stands on high ground, a brahman.'

One whose passion, aversion, & ignorance

have faded away,

has crossed over this ocean

with its seizers,

demons,

dangerous waves,

so hard to cross.

Free from acquisitions

–bonds surmounted,

death abandoned–

he has abandoned stress

with no further becoming.

Having gone to the goal

he

is undefined,

has outwitted, I tell you,

the King of Death.



ITIVUTTAKA 70

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, I have seen beings who–endowed with bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct; who reviled noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views–at the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in the plane of deprivation, the bad destination, the lower realms, in hell. It is not from having heard this from another contemplative or brahman that I tell you that I have seen beings who–endowed with bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct; who reviled noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views–at the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. It is from having known it myself, seen it myself, realized it myself that I tell you that I have seen beings who–endowed with bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct; who reviled noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views–at the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.'

With mind wrongly directed,

speaking wrong speech,

doing wrong deeds with the body:

a person here

of next-to-nothing learning,

a doer of evil

here in this next-to-nothing life,

at the break-up of the body,

undiscerning,

reappears in hell.



ITIVUTTAKA 71

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, I have seen beings who–endowed with bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, & mental good conduct; who did not revile noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views–at the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world. It's not from having heard this from another contemplative or brahman that I tell you that I have seen beings who–endowed with bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, & mental good conduct; who did not revile noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views–at the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world. It's from having known it myself, seen it myself, realized it myself that I tell you that I have seen beings who–endowed with bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, & mental good conduct; who did not revile noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views–at the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world.'

With mind rightly directed,

speaking right speech,

doing right deeds with the body:

a person here

of much learning,

a doer of merit

here in this next-to-nothing life,

at the break-up of the body,

discerning,

reappears in heaven.



ITIVUTTAKA 72

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three properties for escape. Which three? This is the escape from sensuality: renunciation. This is the escape from form: formlessness. And as for whatever has come into being, is fabricated & dependently co-arisen, the escape from that is cessation. These are the three properties for escape.'

Knowing the escape from sensuality,

& the overcoming of forms

–ardent

always–

touching the stilling

of all fabrications:

he is a monk

who's seen rightly.

From that he is there released.

A master of direct knowing,

at peace,

he is a sage

gone beyond bonds.



ITIVUTTAKA 73

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, formless phenomena are more peaceful than forms; cessation, more peaceful than formless phenomena.'

Those beings headed to forms,

and those standing in the formless,

with no knowledge of cessation,

return to further becoming.

But, comprehending form,

not taking a stance in formless things,

those released in cessation

are people who've left death behind.

Having touched with his body

the deathless property free

from acquisitions,

having realized relinquishing

of acquisitions,

effluent-free,

the Rightly Self-awakened One

teaches the state

with

no sorrow,

no dust.



ITIVUTTAKA 74

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three types of sons & daughters existing in the world. Which three? One of heightened birth, one of similar birth, one of lowered birth.

'And how is a son or daughter of heightened birth? There is the case where a son or daughter's parents have not gone to the Buddha for refuge, have not gone to the Dhamma for refuge, have not gone to the Saṅgha for refuge. They do not abstain from taking life, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from fermented & distilled liquors that cause heedlessness. They are unprincipled & evil by nature. However, their son or daughter has gone to the Buddha for refuge, has gone to the Dhamma for refuge, has gone to the Saṅgha for refuge. He or she abstains from taking life, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from fermented & distilled liquors that cause heedlessness. He or she is principled & admirable by nature. This is called a son or daughter of heightened birth.

'And how is a son or daughter of similar birth? There is the case where a son or daughter's parents have gone to the Buddha for refuge, have gone to the Dhamma for refuge, have gone to the Saṅgha for refuge. They abstain from taking life, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from fermented & distilled liquors that cause heedlessness. They are principled & admirable by nature. Their son or daughter has also gone to the Buddha for refuge, has gone to the Dhamma for refuge, has gone to the Saṅgha for refuge. He or she abstains from taking life, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from fermented & distilled liquors that cause heedlessness. He or she is principled & admirable by nature. This is called a son or daughter of similar birth.

'And how is a son or daughter of lowered birth? There is the case where a son or daughter's parents have gone to the Buddha for refuge, have gone to the Dhamma for refuge, have gone to the Saṅgha for refuge. They abstain from taking life, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from fermented & distilled liquors that cause heedlessness. They are principled & admirable by nature. However, their son or daughter has not gone to the Buddha for refuge, has not gone to the Dhamma for refuge, has not gone to the Saṅgha for refuge. He or she does not abstain from taking life, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from fermented & distilled liquors that cause heedlessness. He or she is unprincipled & evil by nature. This is called a son or daughter of lowered birth.'

The wise hope for a child

of heightened or similar birth,

not for one

of lowered birth,

a destroyer of the family.

These children in the world,

lay followers

–consummate in virtue, conviction;

generous, free from stinginess–

shine forth in any gathering

like the moon

when freed from a cloud.



ITIVUTTAKA 75

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, these three types of persons can be found existing in the world. Which three? One like a cloud without rain, one who rains locally, and one who rains everywhere.

'And how is a person like a cloud without rain? There is the case where a person is not a giver of food, drink, clothing, vehicles, garlands, scents, ointments, beds, dwellings, or lights to anyone at all: to contemplatives or brahmans, to any of the miserable, the homeless, or beggars. This is how a person is like a cloud without rain.

'And how is a person one who rains locally? There is the case where a person is a giver of food, drink, clothing, vehicles, garlands, scents, ointments, beds, dwellings, & lights to some contemplatives & brahmans, to some of the miserable, the homeless, & beggars, but not to others. This is how a person is one who rains locally.

'And how is a person one who rains everywhere? There is the case where a person gives food, drink, clothing, vehicles, garlands, scents, ointments, beds, dwellings, & lights to all contemplatives & brahmans, to all of the miserable, the homeless, & beggars. This is how a person is one who rains everywhere.

'These are the three types of persons who can be found existing in the world.'

Not to contemplatives,

to brahmans,

to the miserable,

nor to the homeless

does he share what he's gained:

food,

drinks,

nourishment.

He, that lowest of people,

is called a cloud with no rain.

To some he doesn't give,

to others he does:

the intelligent call him

one who rains locally.

A person responsive to requests,

sympathetic to all beings,

delighting in distributing alms:

'Give to them!

Give!'

he says.

As a cloud–resounding, thundering–rains,

filling with water, drenching

the plateaus & gullies:

a person like this

is like that.

Having rightly amassed

wealth attained through initiative,

he satisfies rightly with food & drink

those fallen into

the homeless state.



ITIVUTTAKA 76

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Aspiring to these three forms of bliss, monks, a wise person should guard his virtue. Which three? [Thinking,] 'May praise come to me,' a wise person should guard his virtue. [Thinking,] 'May wealth come to me,' a wise person should guard his virtue. [Thinking,] 'At the break-up of the body, after death, may I reappear in a good destination, a heavenly world,' a wise person should guard his virtue. Aspiring to these three forms of bliss, a wise person should guard his virtue.'

Intelligent,

you should guard your virtue,

aspiring to three forms of bliss:

praise;

the obtaining of wealth;

and, after death, rejoicing

in heaven.

Even if you do no evil

but seek out one who does,

you're suspected of evil.

Your bad reputation

grows.

The sort of person you make a friend,

the sort you seek out,

that's the sort you yourself become–

for your living together is of

that sort.

The one associated with,

the one who associates,

the one who's touched,

the one who touches another

–like an arrow smeared with poison–

contaminates the quiver.

So, fearing contamination, the enlightened

should not be comrades

with evil people.

A man who wraps rotting fish

in a blade of kusa grass

makes the grass smelly:

so it is

if you seek out fools.

But a man who wraps powdered incense

in the leaf of a tree

makes the leaf fragrant:

so it is

if you seek out

the enlightened.

So,

knowing your own outcome

as like the leaf-wrapper's,

you shouldn't seek out

those who aren't good.

The wise would associate

with those who are.

Those who aren't good

lead you to hell.

The good help you reach

a good destination.



ITIVUTTAKA 77

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, this body falls apart; consciousness is subject to fading; all acquisitions are inconstant, stressful, subject to change.'

Knowing the body as                  falling apart,

& consciousness            as dissolving away,

seeing the danger                  in acquisitions,

you've gone beyond

birth & death.

Having reached the foremost peace,

you bide your time,

composed.



ITIVUTTAKA 78

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, it's in accordance with their properties that beings come together & associate with one another. Beings of low dispositions come together & associate with beings of low dispositions. Beings of admirable dispositions come together & associate with beings of admirable dispositions. In the past, it was in accordance with their properties that beings came together & associated with one another.… In the future, it will be in accordance with their properties that beings will come together & associate with one another.… And now at present, it's in accordance with their properties that beings come together & associate with one another. Beings of low dispositions come together & associate with beings of low dispositions. Beings of admirable dispositions come together & associate with beings of admirable dispositions.'

The underbrush born

of association

is cut away

by non-association.

Just as one riding

a small wooden plank

would sink

in the great sea,

so does even one of right living

sink,

associating with the lazy.

So avoid the lazy,

those with low persistence.

Live with the noble ones–

secluded, resolute, absorbed in jhāna,

their persistence constantly aroused

: the wise.



ITIVUTTAKA 79

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, these three things lead to the falling away of a monk in training. Which three? There is the case where a monk in training enjoys activity, delights in activity, is intent on his enjoyment of activity. He enjoys chatter, delights in chatter, is intent on his enjoyment of chatter. He enjoys sleep, delights in sleep, is intent on his enjoyment of sleep. These are the three things that lead to the falling away of a monk in training.

'These three things lead to the non-falling away of a monk in training. Which three? There is the case where a monk in training doesn't enjoy activity, doesn't delight in activity, isn't intent on his enjoyment of activity. He doesn't enjoy chatter, doesn't delight in chatter, isn't intent on his enjoyment of chatter. He doesn't enjoy sleep, doesn't delight in sleep, isn't intent on his enjoyment of sleep. These are the three things that lead to the non-falling away of a monk in training.'

Enjoying activity,

delighting in chatter,

enjoying sleep,

& restless:

he's incapable

–a monk like this–

of touching superlative

self-awakening.

So he should be a man of few duties,

of little sloth,

not restless.

He's capable

–a monk like this–

of touching superlative

self-awakening.



ITIVUTTAKA 80

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three kinds of unskillful thinking. Which three? Thinking concerned with not wanting to be despised; thinking concerned with gains, offerings, & tribute; thinking concerned with an empathy for others. There are three kinds of unskillful thinking.'

Fettered

to not wanting to be despised;

to gains, offerings, respect;

to delight in companions:

you're far from the ending of fetters.

But whoever here,

having abandoned

sons,

cattle,

marriage,

intimates:

he's capable

–a monk like this–

of touching superlative

self-awakening.



ITIVUTTAKA 81

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, I have seen beings conquered by receiving offerings–their minds overwhelmed–at the break-up of the body, after death, reappearing in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. I have seen beings conquered by not receiving offerings–their minds overwhelmed–at the break-up of the body, after death, reappearing in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. I have seen beings conquered both by receiving offerings & by not receiving offerings–their minds overwhelmed–at the break-up of the body, after death, reappearing in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.

'It's not through having heard it from another contemplative or brahman that I say, 'I have seen beings conquered by receiving offerings–their minds overwhelmed–at the break-up of the body, after death, reappearing in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. I have seen beings conquered by not receiving offerings–their minds overwhelmed–at the break-up of the body, after death, reappearing in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. I have seen beings conquered both by receiving offerings & by not receiving offerings–their minds overwhelmed–at the break-up of the body, after death, reappearing in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.'

'Instead, it's from having known it myself, seen it myself, observed it myself that I say, 'I have seen beings conquered by receiving offerings–their minds overwhelmed–at the break-up of the body, after death, reappearing in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. I have seen beings conquered by not receiving offerings–their minds overwhelmed–at the break-up of the body, after death, reappearing in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. I have seen beings conquered both by receiving offerings & by not receiving offerings–their minds overwhelmed–at the break-up of the body, after death, reappearing in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell.'

Both when receiving offerings

& not,

his concentration

doesn't waver;

he remains

heedful:

he–continually absorbed in jhāna,

subtle in view & clear-seeing,

enjoying the ending of clinging–

is called a man

of integrity.



ITIVUTTAKA 82

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, these three divine sounds sound forth among the devas on appropriate occasions. Which three? When a disciple of the noble ones, shaving off his hair & beard, clothing himself in the ochre robe, makes up his mind to go forth from the home life into homelessness, on that occasion the divine sound sounds forth among the devas: 'This disciple of the noble ones has made up his mind to do battle with Māra.' This is the first divine sound that sounds forth among the devas on appropriate occasions.

'When a disciple of the noble ones lives devoted to developing the seven [sets of] qualities that are wings to awakening, on that occasion the divine sound sounds forth among the devas: 'This disciple of the noble ones is doing battle with Māra.' This is the second divine sound that sounds forth among the devas on appropriate occasions.

'When a disciple of the noble ones, through the ending of effluents, dwells in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, directly knowing & realizing it for himself right in the here-&-now, on that occasion the divine sound sounds forth among the devas: 'This disciple of the noble ones has won the battle. Having been in the front lines of the battle, he now dwells victorious.' This is the third divine sound that sounds forth among the devas on appropriate occasions.

'These are the three divine sounds that sound forth among the devas on appropriate occasions.'

Seeing he's won the battle

–the disciple of the Rightly

Self-awakened One–

even the devas pay homage

to this great one, thoroughly mature.

'Homage to you, O thoroughbred man–

you who have won the hard victory,

defeating the army of Death,

unhindered in

emancipation.'

Thus they pay homage, the devas,

to one who has reached the heart's goal,

for they see in him no means

that would bring him under Death's sway.



ITIVUTTAKA 83

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard:

'Monks, when a deva is about to pass away from the company of devas, five omens appear: his garlands wither, his clothes get soiled, sweat comes out of his armpits, a dullness descends on his body, he no longer delights in his own deva-seat. The devas, knowing from this that 'This deva-son is about to pass away,' encourage him with three sayings: 'Go from here, honorable sir, to a good destination. Having gone to a good destination, gain the gain that is good to gain. Having gained the gain that is good to gain, become well-established.'

When this was said, a certain monk said to the Blessed One, 'What, lord, is the devas' reckoning of going to a good destination? What is their reckoning of the gain that is good to gain? What is their reckoning of becoming well-established?'

'The human state, monks, is the devas' reckoning of going to a good destination. Having become a human being, acquiring conviction in the Dhamma-&-Vinaya taught by the Tathāgata: this is the devas' reckoning of the gain that is good to gain. When that conviction is settled within one–rooted, established, & strong, not to be destroyed by any brahman or contemplative; deva, Māra, or Brahma; or anyone else in the world: this is the devas' reckoning of becoming well-established.'

When a deva passes away

from the company of devas

through his life-span's ending,

three sounds sound forth

–the devas' encouragement.

'Go from here,

honorable sir,

to a good destination,

to companionship

with human beings.

On becoming a human being,

acquire a conviction

unsurpassed

in True Dhamma.

That conviction of yours

in True Dhamma, well-taught,

should be

settled,

rooted,

established,

–undestroyed

as long as you live.

Having abandoned

bodily misconduct,

verbal misconduct,

mental misconduct,

and whatever else is flawed;

having done with the body what's skillful,

and much that is skillful with speech,

having done what's skillful

with a heart without limit,

with no acquisitions,

then–having made much of the merit

that's a ground for spontaneously arising [in heaven]

through giving–

establish other mortals

in

True Dhamma &

the holy life.'

With this sympathy, the devas–

when they know a deva is passing away–

encourage him:

'Come back, deva,

again & again.'



ITIVUTTAKA 84

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, these three persons, appearing in the world, appear for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine. Which three?

'There is the case where a Tathāgata appears in the world, worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in clear knowing & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the cosmos, unsurpassed trainer of tamable people, teacher of beings human & divine, awakened, blessed. He teaches the Dhamma admirable in its beginning, admirable in its middle, admirable in its end. He proclaims the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure. This is the first person who, appearing in the world, appears for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine.

'Furthermore, there is the disciple of that Teacher who is a worthy one, his effluents ended, who has reached fulfillment, done the task, laid down the burden, attained the true goal, totally destroyed the fetter of becoming, and who is released through right gnosis. He teaches the Dhamma admirable in its beginning, admirable in its middle, admirable in its end. He proclaims the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure. This is the second person who, appearing in the world, appears for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine.

'Furthermore, there is the disciple of that Teacher who is one who follows the practice for one in training, erudite, having entered into [good] habits & practices. He, too, teaches the Dhamma admirable in its beginning, admirable in its middle, admirable in its end. He proclaims the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely perfect, surpassingly pure. This is the third person who, appearing in the world, appears for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine.

'These are the three persons who, appearing in the world, appear for the benefit of many, the happiness of many, in sympathy for the world–for the welfare, the benefit, the happiness of beings human & divine.'

The Teacher,

Great Seer,

is first in the world;

following him, the disciple

with mind composed;

and then the erudite one

who follows the practice for one in training,

having entered into good         habits,

practices.

These three, chief

among beings divine & human,

giving light, proclaiming the Dhamma,

throw open the door to the Deathless,

release many from bondage.

Those who follow the path,

well-taught by the Caravan Leader

unsurpassed,

will put an end to stress

right here–

those heeding the message

of the One Well-Gone.



ITIVUTTAKA 85

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Remain focused, monks, on foulness in the body. Have mindfulness of in-&-out breathing well-established to the fore within you. Remain focused on the inconstancy of all fabrications. For one who remains focused on the foulness of the body, the obsession with passion for the property of beauty is abandoned. For one who has mindfulness of in-&-out breathing well-established to the fore within oneself, annoying external thoughts & inclinations don't exist. For one who remains focused on the inconstancy of all fabrications, ignorance is abandoned, clear knowing arises.'

Focusing on foulness

in the body,

mindful

of in-&-out breathing,

seeing

the pacification of all fabrications

–ardent

always:

he is a monk

who's seen rightly.

From that he is there released.

A master of direct knowing,

at peace,

he is a sage

gone beyond bonds.



ITIVUTTAKA 86

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, with reference to a monk who practices the Dhamma in accordance with the Dhamma, it is this way of according with the Dhamma that he should be described as practicing the Dhamma in accordance with the Dhamma. When speaking, he speaks Dhamma and not non-Dhamma. When thinking, he thinks about Dhamma and not about non-Dhamma. Avoiding both these things, he stays equanimous, mindful, alert.'

Dhamma his dwelling,

Dhamma his delight,

a monk pondering Dhamma,

calling Dhamma to mind,

doesn't fall away

from true Dhamma.

Whether

walking,

standing,

sitting, or

lying down

–his mind inwardly restrained–

he arrives

right at peace.



ITIVUTTAKA 87

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three kinds of unskillful thinking that produce blindness, produce lack of vision, produce lack of knowledge, lead to the cessation of discernment, side with vexation, and are not conducive to Unbinding. Which three? Thinking imbued with sensuality.… Thinking imbued with ill-will.… Thinking imbued with harmfulness produces blindness, produces lack of vision, produces lack of knowledge, leads to the cessation of discernment, sides with vexation, and is not conducive to Unbinding. These are the three kinds of unskillful thinking that produce blindness, produce lack of vision, produce lack of knowledge, lead to the cessation of discernment, side with vexation, and are not conducive to Unbinding.

'There are these three kinds of skillful thinking that produce non-blindness, produce vision, produce knowledge, foster discernment, side with non-vexation, and are conducive to Unbinding. Which three? Thinking imbued with renunciation.… Thinking imbued with non-ill-will.… Thinking imbued with harmlessness produces non-blindness, produces vision, produces knowledge, fosters discernment, sides with non-vexation, and is conducive to Unbinding. These are the three kinds of skillful thinking that produce non-blindness, produce vision, produce knowledge, foster discernment, side with non-vexation, and are conducive to Unbinding.'

Three skillful thoughts

should be thought,

three unskillful thoughts

rejected.

Whoever stills thoughts & evaluations

–as rain would, a cloud of dust–

through an awareness with thinking stilled,

attains right here

the state

of peace.



ITIVUTTAKA 88

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three inside stains, inside enemies, inside foes, inside murderers, inside adversaries. Which three? Greed is an inside stain, inside enemy, inside foe, inside murderer, inside adversary. Aversion is an inside stain.… Delusion is an inside stain, inside enemy, inside foe, inside murderer, inside adversary. These are the three inside stains, inside enemies, inside foes, inside murderers, inside adversaries.'

Greed causes harm.

Greed provokes the mind.

People don't realize it

as a danger born from within.

A person, when greedy,

doesn't know his own welfare;

when greedy,

doesn't see Dhamma.

Overcome with greed,

he's in the dark, blind.

But when one, abandoning greed,

feels no greed

for what would merit greed,

greed gets shed from him–

like a drop of water

off a lotus leaf.

Aversion causes harm.

Aversion provokes the mind.

People don't realize it

as a danger born from within.

A person, when aversive,

doesn't know his own welfare;

when aversive,

doesn't see Dhamma.

Overcome with aversion

he's in the dark, blind.

But when one, abandoning aversion,

feels no aversion

for what would merit aversion,

aversion drops away from him–

like a palm leaf from its stem.

Delusion causes harm.

Delusion provokes the mind.

People don't realize it

as a danger born from within.

A person, when deluded,

doesn't know his own welfare;

when deluded,

doesn't see Dhamma.

Overcome with delusion

he's in the dark, blind.

But when one, abandoning delusion,

feels no delusion

for what would merit delusion,

he disperses all delusion–

as the rising of the sun, the dark.



ITIVUTTAKA 89

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, conquered by three forms of false Dhamma–his mind overwhelmed–Devadatta is incurably doomed to deprivation, to hell, for an eon. Which three? Conquered by evil desires–his mind overwhelmed–Devadatta is incurably doomed to deprivation, to hell, for the duration of an eon. Conquered by friendship with evil people–his mind overwhelmed–Devadatta is incurably doomed to deprivation, to hell, for the duration of an eon. And, there being something further to be done, he nevertheless stopped halfway with a lower modicum of distinctive attainment. Conquered by these three forms of false Dhamma–his mind overwhelmed–Devadatta is incurably doomed to deprivation, to hell, for an eon.'

May no one in the world

ever be reborn

with evil desire.

Know that

through that

evil desire,

his destination's that

of all who have evil desires.

I've heard how Devadatta,

–regarded as wise, composed,

incandescent with honor–

in the thrall of heedlessness

assaulted the Tathāgata

and fell to the four-gated, fearful place:

Avīci, unmitigated hell.

Whoever plots against

one free of corruption

who's done no evil deed:

that evil touches him himself,

corrupted in mind,

disrespectful.

Whoever might think

of polluting the ocean

with a pot of poison,

couldn't succeed,

for the mass of water is great.

So it is

when anyone attacks with abuse

the Tathāgata

–rightly-gone,

of peaceful mind–

for abuse doesn't grow on him.

A wise person should make friends,

should associate,

with a person like him–

whose path a monk can pursue

and reach the ending

of suffering & stress.



ITIVUTTAKA 90

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three supreme objects of confidence. Which three?

'Among whatever beings there may be–footless, two-footed, four-footed, many footed; with form or formless; percipient, non-percipient, neither percipient nor non-percipient–the Tathāgata, worthy & rightly self-awakened, is considered supreme. Those who have confidence in the Awakened One have confidence in what is supreme; and for those with confidence in the supreme, supreme is the result.

'Among whatever dhammas there may be, fabricated or unfabricated, dispassion–the subduing of intoxication, the elimination of thirst, the uprooting of attachment, the breaking of the round, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, the realization of Unbinding–is considered supreme. Those who have confidence in the dhamma of dispassion have confidence in what is supreme; and for those with confidence in the supreme, supreme is the result.

'Among whatever fabricated qualities there may be, the noble eightfold path–right view, right resolve, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration–is considered supreme. Those who have confidence in the dhamma of the noble path have confidence in what is supreme; and for those with confidence in the supreme, supreme is the result.

'Among whatever communities or groups there may be, the Saṅgha of the Tathāgata's disciples is considered supreme–i e, the four [groups of noble disciples] when taken as pairs, the eight when taken as persons. Those who have confidence in the Saṅgha have confidence in what is supreme; and for those with confidence in the supreme, supreme will be the result.

'These, monks, are the three supreme objects of confidence.'

With

confidence,

realizing the supreme Dhamma

to be supreme;

confidence in the supreme Buddha,

unsurpassed

in deserving offerings;

confidence in the supreme Dhamma,

the bliss of stilling, dispassion;

confidence in the supreme Saṅgha,

unsurpassed

as a field of merit;

having given gifts to the supreme,

one develops supreme merit,

supreme long life & beauty,

status, honor,

bliss, & strength.

Having given to the supreme,

the wise person, centered

in supreme Dhamma,

whether becoming a divine or human being,

rejoices,

having attained the supreme.



ITIVUTTAKA 91

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, this is a lowly means of livelihood, alms gathering. It's a form of abuse in the world [to say], 'You go around as an alms gatherer with a bowl in your hand!' Yet reasonable young men of good families have taken it up for a compelling reason. They have not been forced into it by kings or robbers, nor through debt, through fear, nor through the loss of their livelihood, but through the thought: 'We are beset by birth, aging, & death, by sorrows, lamentations, pains, distresses, & despairs, beset by stress, overcome with stress. O, that the end of this entire mass of suffering & stress might be known!' But this young man of good family, having gone forth in this way, may be greedy for sensual pleasures, strong in his passions, malevolent in mind, corrupt in his resolves, his mindfulness muddled, unalert, uncentered, his mind scattered, & his faculties uncontrolled. Just as a firebrand from a funeral pyre–burning at both ends, covered with excrement in the middle–is used as fuel neither in a village nor in the wilderness: I tell you that this is a simile for this person. He has missed out on the householder's enjoyments and does not fulfill the purpose of the contemplative life.'

He's missed out

on the householder's enjoyment

& the purpose of the contemplative life

–unfortunate man!

Ruining it, he throws it away,

perishes

like a firebrand used at a funeral.

Better to eat an iron ball

–glowing, aflame–

than that, unprincipled &

unrestrained,

he should eat the alms of the country.



ITIVUTTAKA 92

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, even if a monk, taking hold of my outer robe, were to follow right behind me, placing his feet in my footsteps, yet if he were to be greedy for sensuality, strong in his passions, malevolent in mind, corrupt in his resolves, his mindfulness muddled, unalert, uncentered, his mind scattered, & his faculties uncontrolled, then he would be far from me, and I from him. Why is that? Because he does not see the Dhamma. Not seeing the Dhamma, he does not see me.

'But even if a monk were to live one hundred leagues away, yet if he were to have no greed for sensuality, were not strong in his passions, not malevolent in mind, uncorrupt in his resolves, his mindfulness established, alert, centered, his mind at singleness, & his faculties well-restrained, then he would be near to me, and I to him. Why is that? Because he sees the Dhamma. Seeing the Dhamma, he sees me.'

Though following right behind,

ambitious, annoyed:

see how far he is!–

the perturbed

from the unperturbed,

the bound

from the Unbound,

the greedy one

from the one with no greed.

But the wise person who, through

direct knowledge of Dhamma,

gnosis of Dhamma,

grows still & unperturbed

like a lake unruffled by wind:

see how close he is!–

the unperturbed to the unperturbed,

the Unbound to the Unbound,

the greedless one

to the one with no greed.



ITIVUTTAKA 93

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three fires. Which three? The fire of passion, the fire of aversion, the fire of delusion. These are the three fires.'

The fire of passion burns in a mortal

delighting in,

smitten with

sensual desires;

the fire of aversion, in a malevolent person

taking life;

the fire of delusion, in a bewildered person

ignorant

of the noble teaching.

Not understanding these fires, people

–fond of self-identity–

unreleased from Māra's shackles,

swell the ranks of hell,

the wombs of common animals, demons,

the realm of the hungry ghosts.

While those who, day & night,

are devoted

to the message

of the rightly self-awakened,

put out the fire of passion,

constantly perceiving the foul.

They, superlative people,

put out the fire of aversion

with good will,

and the fire of delusion

with the discernment leading

to penetration.

They, the masterful, untiring by night & day,

having put out [the fires],

having,         without remainder,

comprehended stress,

are,            without remainder,

totally unbound.

They, the wise, with an attainer-of-wisdom's

noble vision,

right gnosis,

directly knowing

the ending of birth,

come to no further becoming.



ITIVUTTAKA 94

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, a monk should investigate in such a way that–his consciousness neither externally scattered & diffused, nor internally positioned–he is, from lack of clinging or sustenance, unagitated, and there is no coming into being of the origination of future birth, aging, death, or stress.'

For a monk who has abandoned

seven attachments

and cut the guide:

the wandering-on in birth

is finished;

there is, for him,

no further becoming.



ITIVUTTAKA 95

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these three ways of obtaining sensual pleasures. Which three? Those whose sensual pleasures are already provided, those who delight in creating, those with control over what is created by others. These are the three ways of obtaining sensual pleasures.'

Devas whose pleasures are already provided,

those with control,

those who delight in creation,

and any others enjoying sensual pleasures

in this state here

or anywhere else,

don't go beyond

the wandering-on.

Knowing this drawback

in sensual pleasures, the wise

should abandon all sensual desires,

whether human

or divine.

Having cut the flow of greed

for lovely, alluring forms

so hard to transcend,

having,         without remainder,

comprehended stress,

they are,      without remainder,

totally unbound.

They, the wise, with an attainer-of-wisdom's

noble vision,

right gnosis,

directly knowing the ending of birth,

come to no further becoming.



ITIVUTTAKA 96

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Tied by the yoke of sensuality & the yoke of becoming, monks, one is a returner, returning to this state. Untied from the yoke of sensuality but tied by the yoke of becoming, one is a non-returner, not returning to this state. Untied from [both] the yoke of sensuality & from the yoke of becoming, one is an Arahant whose effluents are ended.'

Tied by both

the yoke of sensuality

& the yoke of becoming,

beings go to the wandering-on

leading to birth

& death.

Those who've abandoned the sensual

without reaching the ending of effluents,

are tied               by the yoke of becoming,

are said to be               Non-returners.

While those who've cut off doubt

have no more conceit

or further becoming.

They who have reached

the ending of effluents,

while in the world

have gone

beyond.



ITIVUTTAKA 97

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, a monk who has admirable virtue, admirable qualities, & admirable discernment is called, in this Dhamma-&-Vinaya, one who is complete, fulfilled, a superlative person.

'And how is a monk a person with admirable virtue? There is the case where a monk is virtuous. He dwells restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in his behavior & sphere of activity. He trains himself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults. In this way a monk is a person with admirable virtue. Thus he is of admirable virtue.

'And how is a monk a person with admirable qualities? There is the case where a monk lives devoted to developing the seven [sets of] qualities that are wings to awakening. In this way a monk is a person with admirable qualities. Thus he is of admirable virtue & admirable qualities.

'And how is a monk a person with admirable discernment? There is the case where a monk–with the ending of effluents–remains in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, directly knowing & realizing it for himself right in the here-&-now. In this way a monk is a person with admirable discernment. Thus he is of admirable virtue, admirable qualities, admirable discernment. In this Dhamma-&-Vinaya he is called one who is complete, fulfilled, a superlative person.'

Devoid of wrong-doing

in thought, word, or deed,

he's called a person of admirable virtue:

the monk conscientious.

Well-developed in the qualities

that go to the attainment of self-awakening,

he's called a person of admirable qualities:

the monk unassuming.

Discerning right here for himself,

in himself,

the ending of stress

he's called a person of admirable discernment:

the monk with no effluent.

Consummate in

these things,

untroubled, with doubt cut away,

unattached in all the world,

he's said to have abandoned

the All.



ITIVUTTAKA 98

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these two kinds of gifts: a gift of material things & a gift of the Dhamma. Of these two kinds of gifts, this is supreme: a gift of the Dhamma. There are these two kinds of sharing: sharing of material things & sharing of the Dhamma. Of these two kinds of sharing, this is supreme: sharing of the Dhamma. There are these two kinds of assistance: assistance with material things & assistance with the Dhamma. Of these two kinds of assistance, this is supreme: assistance with the Dhamma.'

The gift he describes

as supreme

& unsurpassed,

the sharing the Blessed One has extolled:

who–confident in the supreme field of merit,

wise, discerning–

wouldn't give it at appropriate times?

Both for those who proclaim it

and those who listen,

confident in the message of the One Well-Gone:

it purifies their foremost benefit–

those heeding the message

of the One Well-Gone.



ITIVUTTAKA 99

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'It's with reference to Dhamma, monks, that I describe [a person as] a brahman with threefold knowledge, and not another as measured by citing & reciting. And how is it with reference to Dhamma that I describe [a person as] a brahman with threefold knowledge, and not another as measured by citing & reciting?

'There is the case where a monk recollects his manifold past lives, i e, one birth, two… five, ten… fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand, many eons of cosmic contraction, many eons of cosmic expansion, many eons of cosmic contraction & expansion: 'There I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my sensitivity to pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose there. There too I had such a name, belonged to such a clan, had such an appearance. Such was my food, such my sensitivity to pleasure & pain, such the end of my life. Passing away from that state, I re-arose here.' Thus he recollects his manifold past lives in their modes & details.

'This is the first knowledge he has attained. Ignorance has been destroyed; knowledge has arisen; darkness has been destroyed; light has arisen–as happens in one who remains heedful, ardent, & resolute.

'Then again, the monk sees–by means of the divine eye, purified & surpassing the human–beings passing away & re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior & superior, beautiful & ugly, fortunate & unfortunate in accordance with their actions: 'These beings–who were endowed with bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct; who reviled noble ones, held wrong views and undertook actions under the influence of wrong views–at the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a plane of deprivation, a bad destination, a lower realm, hell. But these beings–who were endowed with bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, & mental good conduct; who did not revile noble ones, who held right views and undertook actions under the influence of right views–at the break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in a good destination, a heavenly world.' Thus–by means of the divine eye, purified & surpassing the human–he sees beings passing away & re-appearing, and discerns how they are inferior & superior, beautiful & ugly, fortunate & unfortunate in accordance with their actions.

'This is the second knowledge he has attained. Ignorance has been destroyed; knowledge has arisen; darkness has been destroyed; light has arisen–as happens in one who remains heedful, ardent, & resolute.

'Then again, the monk–with the ending of effluents–remains in the effluent-free awareness-release & discernment-release, directly knowing & realizing it for himself right in the here-&-now.

'This is the third knowledge he has attained. Ignorance has been destroyed; knowledge has arisen; darkness has been destroyed; light has arisen–as happens in one who remains heedful, ardent, & resolute.

'It's in this way that, with reference to Dhamma, I describe [a person as] a brahman with threefold knowledge, and not another as measured by citing & reciting.'

He knows            his former lives.

He sees            heavens & states of woe,

has attained            the ending of birth,

is a sage            who has mastered direct-knowing.

By means of these three knowledges

he becomes a three-knowledge brahman.

He's what I call a three-knowledge man–

not another,

citing, reciting.



ITIVUTTAKA 100

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'I am a brahman, monks, always responsive to requests, open-handed, bearing my last body, an unsurpassed doctor & surgeon. You are my children, my sons, born from my mouth, born of the Dhamma, created by the Dhamma, heirs to the Dhamma, not heirs in material things.

'There are these two kinds of gifts: a gift of material things & a gift of the Dhamma. Of these two kinds of gifts, this is supreme: a gift of the Dhamma.

'There are these two kinds of sharing: sharing of material things & sharing of the Dhamma. Of these two kinds of sharing, this is supreme: sharing of the Dhamma.

'There are these two kinds of assistance: assistance with material things & assistance with the Dhamma. Of these two kinds of assistance, this is supreme: assistance with the Dhamma.

'There are these two kinds of mass-donations: a mass-donation of material things & a mass-donation of the Dhamma. Of these two kinds of mass-donations, this is supreme: a mass-donation of the Dhamma.'

He who, unstinting,

made the mass-donation of Dhamma,

the Tathāgata,

sympathetic to all beings:

to one of that sort

–the best of beings, human & divine–

living beings pay homage–

to one gone

to the beyond

of becoming.



ITIVUTTAKA 101

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, these four things are next to nothing, both easy to gain & blameless. Which four? Cast-off cloth is next to nothing, both easy to gain & blameless. Alms food is next to nothing, both easy to gain & blameless. The root of a tree as a dwelling place is next to nothing, both easy to gain & blameless. Medicine made of smelly urine is next to nothing, both easy to gain & blameless. These are the four things that are next to nothing, both easy to gain & blameless. When a monk is content with what is next to nothing, easy to gain & blameless, then I say that he has one of the component factors of the contemplative life.'

Content with what's blameless,

next to nothing,

easy to gain,

his mind not vexed over

lodging, clothing,

food, or drink:

the four directions offer him

no                  obstruction.

These things, declared congenial

for the contemplative life,

are possessed by the monk

heedful, content.



ITIVUTTAKA 102

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, for one knowing & seeing, I tell you, there is the ending of effluents, not for one not knowing & seeing. For one knowing what & seeing what is there the ending of effluents? For one knowing & seeing, 'This is stress,' there is the ending of effluents. For one knowing & seeing, 'This is the origination of stress,' there is the ending of effluents. For one knowing & seeing, 'This is the cessation of stress,' there is the ending of effluents. For one knowing & seeing, 'This is the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress,' there is the ending of effluents. For one knowing in this way and seeing in this way is there the ending of effluents.'

For a learner in training

along the straight path, there arises:

first,               the knowledge of ending;

then,               the gnosis unsurpassed;

then,               the gnosis of one released–

release-knowledge, superlative,

the knowledge of ending:

'The fetters are ended.'

Certainly not by the lazy fool

uncomprehending,

is there attained

Unbinding,

the loosening of all ties.



ITIVUTTAKA 103

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, any contemplatives or brahmans who do not discern, as it has come to be, that 'This is stress,' … that 'This is the origination of stress,' … that 'This is the cessation of stress,' who do not discern, as it has come to be, that 'This is the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress': to me these contemplatives & brahmans do not count as contemplatives among contemplatives or as brahmans among brahmans. Furthermore, they do not enter & remain in the goal of the contemplative life or the goal of brahmanly life, having directly known & realized it for themselves right in the here-&-now.

'But any contemplatives or brahmans who discern, as it has come to be, that 'This is stress,' … that 'This is the origination of stress,' … that 'This is the cessation of stress,' who discern, as it has come to be, that 'This is the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress': to me these contemplatives & brahmans count as contemplatives among contemplatives and as brahmans among brahmans. Furthermore, they enter & remain in the goal of the contemplative life & the goal of the brahmanly life, having directly known & realized it for themselves right in the here-&-now.'

Those who don't discern stress,

stress's coming into play,

& where it totally stops,

without trace,

who don't know the path,

the way to the stilling of stress:

lowly

in their awareness-release

& discernment-release,

incapable

of making an end,

they're headed

to birth & aging.

But those who discern stress,

stress's coming into play,

& where it totally stops,

without trace,

who discern the path,

the way to the stilling of stress:

consummate

in their awareness-release

& discernment-release,

capable

of making an end,

they are not headed

to birth & aging.



ITIVUTTAKA 104

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, those monks who are consummate in virtue, consummate in concentration, consummate in discernment, consummate in release, consummate in the knowledge & vision of release; who exhort, demonstrate, instruct, urge, rouse & encourage; who are competent rightly to point out the true Dhamma: seeing them, I tell you, accomplishes a great deal; listening to them… approaching them… attending to them… recollecting them… following them in going forth accomplishes a great deal. Why is that?

'By associating with monks of this sort, sharing with them, attending to them, the as-yet-unculminated aggregate of virtue goes to the culmination of its development, the as-yet-unculminated aggregate of concentration goes to the culmination of its development, the as-yet-unculminated aggregate of discernment goes to the culmination of its development, the as-yet-unculminated aggregate of release goes to the culmination of its development, the as-yet-unculminated aggregate of knowledge & vision of release goes to the culmination of its development. Monks of this sort are said to be teachers, caravan leaders, abandoners of strife, dispellers of darkness, makers of light, makers of radiance, makers of brightness, makers of brilliance, bringers of illumination, noble ones, endowed with eyes that see.'

This is a condition

creating joy

for those who know:

living the Dhamma

of the noble ones,

composed in mind.

They brighten the true Dhamma,

illumine it,

shining brilliantly.

They are

makers of light,

enlightened,

abandoners of strife.

They have eyes

that see.

Having heard their message

with right gnosis, the wise

directly knowing

the ending of birth,

come to no further becoming.



ITIVUTTAKA 105

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, there are these four birthplaces of craving where a monk's craving, when taking birth, takes birth. Which four? Either for the sake of cloth a monk's craving, when taking birth, takes birth. Or for the sake of alms food a monk's craving, when taking birth, takes birth. Or for the sake of lodging a monk's craving, when taking birth, takes birth. Or for the sake of becoming or not becoming this or that a monk's craving, when taking birth, takes birth. These are the four birthplaces of craving where a monk's craving, when taking birth, takes birth.'

With craving his companion, a man

wanders on a long, long time.

Neither in this state here

nor anywhere else

does he go beyond

the wandering-   on.

Knowing this drawback–

that craving brings stress into play–

free         from craving,

devoid              of clinging,

mindful,                           the monk

lives the mendicant life.



ITIVUTTAKA 106

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, living with Brahma are those families where, in the home, mother & father are revered by the children. Living with the first devas are those families where, in the home, mother & father are revered by the children. Living with the first teachers are those families where, in the home, mother & father are revered by the children. Living with those worthy of gifts are those families where, in the home, mother & father are revered by the children. 'Brahma' is a synonym for mother & father. 'The first devas' is a synonym for mother & father. 'The first teachers' is a synonym for mother & father. 'Those worthy of gifts' is a synonym for mother & father. Why is that? Mother & father do much for their children. They care for them, nourish them, introduce them to this world.'

Mother & father,

compassionate to their family,

are called

Brahma,

first teachers,

those worthy of gifts

from their children.

So the wise should pay them

homage,

honor,

with food & drink,

clothing & bedding,

anointing & bathing,

& washing their feet.

Performing these services to their parents,

the wise

are praised right here

and after death

rejoice in heaven.



ITIVUTTAKA 107

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, brahmans & householders are very helpful to you, as they provide you with the requisites of robes, alms food, lodgings, & medical requisites for the sick. And you, monks, are very helpful to brahmans & householders, as you teach them the Dhamma admirable in the beginning, admirable in the middle, admirable in the end; as you expound the holy life both in its particulars & in its essence, entirely complete, surpassingly pure. In this way the holy life is lived in mutual dependence, for the purpose of crossing over the flood, for making a right end to stress.'

Householders & the homeless

in mutual dependence

both reach the true Dhamma:

the unsurpassed safety from bondage.

From householders, the homeless

receive requisites: robes, lodgings,

protection from inclemencies.

While in dependence on those well-gone,

home-loving householders

have conviction in Arahants

of noble discernment,

absorbed in jhāna.

Having practiced the Dhamma here–

the path leading to good destinations–

delighting in the deva world,

they rejoice,

enjoying sensual pleasures.



ITIVUTTAKA 108

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, any monks who are deceitful, stubborn, talkers, frauds, arrogant, & uncentered are not followers of mine. They have turned away from this Dhamma-&-Vinaya. They attain, in terms of this Dhamma-&-Vinaya, no growth, increase, or abundance.

'But any monks who are not deceitful, not talkers, who are enlightened, pliant, & well-centered: they are followers of mine. They have not turned away from this Dhamma-&-Vinaya. They attain, in terms of this Dhamma-&-Vinaya, growth, increase, & abundance.

Deceitful, stubborn, talkers, frauds,

arrogant, uncentered:

they don't grow in the Dhamma

taught by the Rightly

Self-awakened One.

Not deceitful, not talkers,

enlightened, pliant,

well-centered:

they grow in the Dhamma

taught by the One

Rightly

Self-awakened.



ITIVUTTAKA 109

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, suppose a man were being carried along by the flow of a river, lovely & alluring. And then another man with good eyesight, standing on the bank, on seeing him would say, 'My good man, even though you are being carried along by the flow of a river, lovely & alluring, further down from here is a pool with waves & whirlpools, with seizers & demons. On reaching that pool you will suffer death or death-like pain.' Then the first man, on hearing the words of the second man, would make an effort with his hands & feet to go against the flow.

'I have given you this simile to illustrate a meaning. The meaning is this: the flow of the river stands for craving. Lovely & alluring stands for the six internal sense-media. The pool further down stands for the five lower fetters. The waves stand for anger & distress. The whirlpools stand for the five strings of sensuality. The seizers & demons stand for the opposite sex. Against the flow stands for renunciation. Making an effort with hands & feet stands for the arousing of persistence. The man with good eyesight standing on the bank stands for the Tathāgata, worthy & rightly self-awakened.'

Even if it's with pain,

you should abandon

sensual desires

if you aspire

to future safety from bondage.

Rightly discerning,

with a mind well released,

touch release now here,

now there.

An attainer-of-wisdom,

having fulfilled the holy life,

is said to have gone

to the end of the world, gone

beyond.



ITIVUTTAKA 110

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'If, while he is walking, monks, there arises in a monk a thought of sensuality, a thought of ill-will, or a thought of harmfulness, and he does not quickly abandon, dispel, demolish, or wipe that thought out of existence, then a monk walking with such a lack of ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously lethargic & low in his persistence.

'If, while he is standing.…

'If, while he is sitting.…

'If, while he is lying down, there arises in a monk a thought of sensuality, a thought of ill-will, or a thought of harmfulness, and he does not quickly abandon, dispel, demolish, or wipe that thought out of existence, then a monk lying down with such a lack of ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously lethargic & low in his persistence.

'But if, while he is walking, there arises in a monk a thought of sensuality, a thought of ill-will, or a thought of harmfulness, and he quickly abandons, dispels, demolishes, & wipes that thought out of existence, then a monk walking with such ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously resolute, one with persistence aroused.

'If, while he is standing.…

'If, while he is sitting.…

'If, while he is lying down, there arises in a monk a thought of sensuality, a thought of ill-will, or a thought of harmfulness, and he quickly abandons, dispels, demolishes, & wipes that thought out of existence, then a monk lying down with such ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously resolute, one with persistence aroused.'

Whether walking, standing,

sitting, or lying down,

whoever thinks evil thoughts,

related to the household life,

is following no path at all,

smitten

with delusory things.

He's incapable,

a monk like this,

of touching superlative

self-awakening.

But whoever–

walking, standing,

sitting, or lying down–

overcomes thought,

delighting in the stilling of thought:

he's capable,

a monk like this,

of touching superlative

self-awakening.



ITIVUTTAKA 111

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Be consummate in virtue, monks, and consummate in the Pāṭimokkha. Dwell restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in your behavior & sphere of activity. Train yourselves, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults.

'When one is consummate in virtue, consummate in the Pāṭimokkha; dwelling restrained in accordance with the Pāṭimokkha, consummate in one's behavior & sphere of activity; training oneself, having undertaken the training rules, seeing danger in the slightest faults–what more is to be done?

'If, while he is walking, any greed in a monk is done away with, any ill will… any sloth & torpor… any restlessness & anxiety is done away with, any uncertainty is abandoned; if his persistence is aroused and not lax; if his mindfulness is established & unmuddled; if his body is calm & unaroused; if his mind is centered & unified: then a monk walking with such ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously resolute, one with persistence aroused.

'If, while he is standing.…

'If, while he is sitting.…

'If, while he is lying down, any greed in a monk is done away with, any ill will… any sloth & torpor… any restlessness & anxiety is done away with, any uncertainty is abandoned; if his persistence is aroused and not lax; if his mindfulness is established & unmuddled; if his body is calm & unaroused; if his mind is centered & unified: then a monk lying down with such ardency & compunction is called continually & continuously resolute, one with persistence aroused.'

Controlled in walking,

controlled in standing,

controlled in sitting,

controlled in lying down,

controlled in flexing & extending his limbs

–above, around, & below,

as far as the worlds extend–

observing the arising & passing away

of phenomena,

of aggregates:

a monk who dwells thus ardently,

not restlessly, at peace–

always

mindful,

training in the mastery

of awareness-tranquility–

is said to be continually

resolute.



ITIVUTTAKA 112

This was said by the Blessed One, said by the Arahant, so I have heard: 'Monks, the world has been fully awakened to by the Tathāgata. From the world, the Tathāgata is disjoined. The origination of the world has been fully awakened to by the Tathāgata. The origination of the world has, by the Tathāgata, been abandoned. The cessation of the world has been fully awakened to by the Tathāgata. The cessation of the world has, by the Tathāgata, been realized. The path leading to the cessation of the world has been fully awakened to by the Tathāgata. The path leading to the cessation of the world has, by the Tathāgata, been developed.

'Whatever in this world with its devas, Māras, & Brahmās, in this generation with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk, is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought after, pondered by the intellect, that has been fully awakened to by the Tathāgata. Thus he is called the Tathāgata.

'From the night the Tathāgata fully awakens to the unsurpassed Right Self-awakening to the night he is totally unbound in the Unbinding property with no fuel remaining, whatever the Tathāgata has said, spoken, explained is just so (tatha) and not otherwise. Thus he is called the Tathāgata.

'The Tathāgata is one who does in line with (tathā) what he teaches, one who teaches in line with what he does. Because he is one who does in line with what he teaches, one who teaches in line with what he does, he is thus called the Tathāgata.

'In this world with its devas, Māras, & Brahmas, in this generation with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & common people, the Tathāgata is the unconquered conqueror, total seer, the wielder of power. Thus he is called the Tathāgata.'

This is the meaning of what the Blessed One said. So with regard to this it was said:

Directly knowing all the world,

all the world as it really is,

from all the world disjoined,

in all the world unmatched.

Conquering all

in all ways,

enlightened,

released from all bonds,

he touches the foremost peace–

Unbinding, free

from fear.

He is free

of effluent,

of trouble,

awakened,

his doubts cut through;

has attained the ending of action,

is released in the destruction of acquisitions.

He is blessed, awakened.

He is a lion, unsurpassed.

In the world with its devas

he set the Brahma-wheel going.

Thus do divine & human beings

who have gone to the Buddha for refuge,

gathering, pay homage

to the great one, thoroughly mature:

'Tamed, he's the best

of those who can be tamed;

calm, the seer

of those who can be calmed;

released, supreme

among those who can be released;

crossed, the foremost

of those who can cross.'

Thus they pay homage

to the great one, thoroughly mature:

'In this world with its devas,

there's no one

to compare

with you.'

This, too, was the meaning of what was said by the Blessed One, so I have heard.



